blog: Hands-off right-sizing without killing Pods (#55963)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2026/safe-in-place-pod-right-sizing.md

---
layout: blog
title: "Safe In-Place Pod Right-Sizing in Kubernetes 1.33+"
draft: true
math: true
slug: safe-in-place-pod-right-sizing
author: >
  [Sebastien Tardif](https://github.com/SebTardif)
---

With in-place pod resize GA since Kubernetes 1.35, the ecosystem has a
powerful primitive for adjusting container resources without eviction.
But the API is just the mechanism. This post covers the patterns needed
to use it safely in production: staged rollout, multi-signal auto-revert,
HPA coexistence, confidence-based recommendations, and change filtering.

<!--more-->

## The waste problem

According to CAST AI's 2026
[State of Kubernetes Optimization report](https://cast.ai/reports/state-of-kubernetes-optimization/),

> clusters in their dataset averaged 8% CPU utilization and 20% memory

Reviewer: CAST AI has a business reason for this document to exist. I'm not commenting on whether its claims are accurate, but personally, I feel uncomfortable citing commercial companies in the official Kubernetes documentation.

Reviewer 2: +1

Author: Addressed in `29c31032f0`: commercial CAST AI stats removed. Opening uses directional multi-source framing (e.g. Datadog container telemetry with an explicit non-census disclaimer).

utilization. CPU overprovisioning jumped from 40% to 69% year over year,
with memory overprovisioning at 79%. While those numbers reflect their
customer base rather than every cluster in existence, the directional
signal is consistent across vendors: the vast majority of provisioned
compute sits idle.

The root cause is not laziness. It is rational fear. Setting a CPU
request to 2 cores when you only use 400 millicores is the rational

> choice when the alternative is getting OOM-killed at 3 AM. Developers

Reviewer 3: how you OOM killed because of CPU under-request? It doesn't read well

over-provision because under-provisioning has immediate, painful
consequences, while over-provisioning only has a slow, invisible cost.

Kubernetes has had the VerticalPodAutoscaler (VPA) since 2018, yet
VPA in fully automated mode remains far less common than HPA in

> production environments. Why?

Reviewer: IMO - because VPA is a add-on and not a part k core.

> ## Why VPA adoption stalled

Reviewer 4: I'm not too sure I agree with this.
HPA comes shipped with kubernetes core, but VPA is an optional add-on.

Author: Addressed in `29c31032f0`: the post now states explicitly that HPA is core and VPA is an add-on, and that this difference matters for adoption.

VPA's approach to right-sizing had three fundamental problems that
kept it out of production for most teams:

> **Problem 1: Eviction-based updates.** VPA originally changed pod

Reviewer 3: API object kinds use UpperCamelCase: `Pod` not `pod`, `Pods` not `pods`.

Lowercase `pod`/`pods` appears in many places - please capitalize

resources by evicting the pod and letting the controller recreate it

> with new values. This meant downtime, rescheduling, cold cache starts,

Reviewer 4: VPA has protections in place to avoid downtime, it won't evict if there aren't enough healthy pods, and it uses the Eviction API to allow for the PDB to protect the workload.

Author: Addressed in `29c31032f0`: eviction-based VPA apply is described as using the Eviction API and respecting PodDisruptionBudgets, not as unprotected kill.

> and connection drops. VPA's `InPlaceOrRecreate` update mode now addresses

Reviewer 3: this needs to link to documentation. Maybe added here: https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/55947

> and connection drops. VPA's `InPlaceOrRecreate` update mode now addresses

Reviewer: VPA also has `InPlace` mode. https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/autoscaling/vertical-pod-autoscale/#updateMode-InPlace

Author: Addressed in `29c31032f0`: VPA section now includes `InPlace` and `InPlaceOrRecreate`, and treats VPA as the default project-side vertical engine rather than a stalled alternative.

this by leveraging in-place resize when possible.

> **Problem 2: HPA conflicts.** VPA and HPA fight over the same axis.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**Problem 2: HPA conflicts.** VPA and HPA can fight over the same axis.
```

HPA can scale on external metrics and VPA can scale on CPU/RAM

Author: Addressed in `29c31032f0`: wording is that VPA and HPA **can** couple when they share the same resource utilization signal, not that they always fight.

When VPA lowers CPU requests, utilization percentage jumps, triggering
HPA to scale out. More replicas lower utilization again, so VPA lowers
requests further. This feedback loop destabilizes workloads. The
official Kubernetes documentation
[cautions readers about using VPA with HPA on CPU or memory metrics](/docs/concepts/workloads/autoscaling/horizontal-pod-autoscale/#support-for-resource-metrics).

**Problem 3: Opaque recommendations.** VPA relies on a histogram-based
historical usage model whose decision process can be difficult for
operators to inspect or explain. While several parameters are
configurable, understanding why VPA chose a specific value for a
specific workload requires digging into internal state that most
teams never see. When a recommendation is surprising, there is no
straightforward way to audit the reasoning.

VPA's adoption of in-place resize solved the first problem. The
remaining challenges, HPA conflicts and recommendation transparency,
are open problems for any controller that automates resource changes.

> ## In-place pod resize changed everything

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## In-place Pod resize changed everything
```

> Kubernetes 1.27 introduced in-place pod resize as an alpha feature.

Reviewer 3: Enhancement phases use Start Case: Alpha, Beta, GA.

```suggestion
Kubernetes 1.27 introduced in-place Pod resize as an Alpha feature.
```

Also line 73: `beta` → `Beta`.

In 1.33, it graduated to beta and became enabled by default. In 1.35,

> it reached GA. In my view, this is one of the most significant changes to

Reviewer 2: I saw @lmktfy to add the "in my view" prefix, but I still feel that this sentence still seems a little bit odd coming from the official kubernetes blog.

I would avoid such hyperbole. IMO an official k8s blog post should take the tone of the unified view of the kubernetes team rather than an individual. It's a good suggestion, but I feel we should be unopinionated.

cc @lmktfy for your opinion on this too

Reviewer 5: Hi @natasha , we/blog team welcome personal opinions as it gives personal touch it which makes @SebTardif , the author sound like a person rather than a representative.
Note Blogs are not docs :)

Kubernetes resource management since the platform was created.

> The `/resize` subresource on the Pod API lets you change a container's

Reviewer 3: The post discusses the `/resize` subresource and `resizePolicy` in detail but never links to the primary documentation. Consider linking to:
- [Resize Container Resources](/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/resize-container-resources/) at this first detailed mention
- [Vertical Pod Autoscaling](/docs/concepts/workloads/autoscaling/vertical-pod-autoscale/) at the first VPA mention (line 36)
- [Manage Resources for Containers](/docs/concepts/configuration/manage-resources-containers/) where `resizePolicy` is explained

Blog posts  are way more useful when link to official documentation.

Author: Addressed in `29c31032f0`: deep links to resize-container-resources, manage-resources-containers, VPA, HPA, Pod QoS, and disruptions at first real mention.

CPU and memory requests and limits while the container is running.

> No eviction. No rescheduling. No cold starts. The kubelet applies

Reviewer 3: Component binaries require backticks.

```suggestion
No eviction. No rescheduling. No cold starts. The `kubelet` applies
```

the new values directly, and the container continues running without
interruption.

```yaml
# Container resize policy in the pod spec
containers:
  - name: app
    resources:
      requests:
        cpu: "500m"
        memory: "256Mi"
    resizePolicy:
      - resourceName: cpu
        restartPolicy: NotRequired
      - resourceName: memory
        restartPolicy: NotRequired
```

CPU changes with `restartPolicy: NotRequired` are typically applied

> in-place by adjusting cgroup limits. Memory changes are more nuanced:

Reviewer 2: what does 'typically' mean here?

while in-place memory resize is supported, the Kubernetes documentation
notes that `RestartContainer` is often appropriate for memory depending
on runtime constraints. Operators should choose the resize policy per

> resource based on their workload's characteristics.

Reviewer 2: These sentences are I guess technically correct but feel slightly misleading

- Both CPU and memory are done via adjusting cgroup settings. 
- The docs cite using `RestartContainer` specifically for memory when runtime or applications (such as Java) cannot adjust memory allocation dynamically. I think that providing an example of such a case where `RestartContainer` would be needed makes it easier to understand.

Probably this section could just link to the official docs, I don't see a need to re-explain the restart policies

Author: Addressed in `29c31032f0`: notes that both CPU and memory go through cgroups when `NotRequired`, and that `RestartContainer` for memory is about app/runtime adaptivity (for example Java), with a docs-first example rather than re-deriving policy from scratch.

Either way, this is a fundamental shift. Continuous, fine-grained

> resource adjustment is now practical in production without pod eviction.

Reviewer 3: Somewhere here you can say that industry needs to adopt and there are still limitations in some runtimes that do not allow to fully utilize the resized resources. You can find the link of limitations in docs

> But the API is just the mechanism. The hard problems are: how do you

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
But the API is the mechanism. The hard problems are: how do you
```

decide what the right values are, how do you roll out changes safely,
and how do you coexist with HPA?

## Patterns for safe in-place right-sizing

Building a safe right-sizing controller on top of the `/resize` subresource
requires solving several problems that the raw API does not address.
These patterns apply to any controller leveraging in-place resize.

### Pattern 1: Staged rollout

The first rule of production resource management is: do not change
everything at once. A progressive rollout model lets teams build
confidence incrementally.

A practical model uses these five stages:

1. **Observe**: Collect metrics silently. No recommendations, no
   changes. This validates that the metrics pipeline is working.
2. **Recommend**: Compute and surface recommendations, but do not
   apply them. Teams review what would change.
3. **One-shot**: Apply the recommendation to one pod per cycle and
   stop. Validates the resize mechanism on a single instance.

> 4. **Canary**: Resize a percentage of pods (e.g., 10%), observe for

Reviewer 3: Do not use "e.g." — use "for example", "such as", or "like" instead.

```suggestion
4. **Canary**: Resize a percentage of Pods (for example, 10%), observe for
```

Same issue in other places

   a configurable window, and only promote to the full fleet if safety
   checks pass.
5. **Auto**: Continuously resize all eligible pods each reconciliation
   cycle.

This mirrors how organizations adopt any infrastructure change:
read-only first, then single instance, then canary, then full rollout.
Each stage can run for days or weeks before progressing.

### Pattern 2: Multi-signal safety with auto-revert

In-place resize is non-disruptive going forward, but a bad resize can
still cause problems. A right-sizing controller needs to detect failures
and revert automatically, also in-place.

The critical signals to monitor after a resize:

- **OOM kills**: If the container is OOM-killed after a memory decrease,
  revert immediately. Check `lastState.terminated.reason == "OOMKilled"`

>   with a timestamp after the resize.

Reviewer 2: If we are going to mention oomkills, we should mention that we have explicitly built in safety checks to prevent them.  Kubernetes first checks memory usage of the running container, and only lowers the memory cgroups if usage < new limits; otherwise it leaves the resize in an in-progress state.

This is subject to a TOCTOU race condition. If users are seeing common OOMkills after memory decrease, I would like to receive feedback on this as there is still further work we could do to reduce the TOCTOU race conditions. Maybe in the call to action we could point them to the open issue regarding this.

Author: Addressed in `29c31032f0`: memory decrease section covers the kubelet best-effort usage check, the remaining race, and points at kubernetes/kubernetes#135670. Platform guard is separated from application health / multi-signal verify.

- **CPU throttling**: Query `rate(container_cpu_cfs_throttled_periods_total[5m])
  / rate(container_cpu_cfs_periods_total[5m])`. If throttling exceeds a
  threshold (e.g., 50%), the workload may be CPU-constrained and warrants
  investigation of limits, requests, and observed demand. Note that

>   throttling is driven by CPU limits, not requests directly, so this

Reviewer 3: this is indeed interesting. The article is not saying if requests needs to be resized or limits though. So this note seems to miss the context

  signal must be interpreted in context. Add a grace period after resize
  because rate windows include pre-resize data.
- **Restart spikes**: If `restartCount` jumps by more than a threshold
  after resize, something went wrong.

> - **Pod readiness**: If the pod transitions to NotReady after resize,

Reviewer 3: Qualify bare technical terms so readers know what `NotReady` refers to.

```suggestion
- **Pod readiness**: If the Pod transitions to the `NotReady` condition after resize,
```

  revert.
- **Application SLOs**: Custom PromQL queries against application-level
  metrics (latency percentiles, error rates) provide the strongest
  signal. If p99 latency exceeds an SLO after resize, the resources
  are insufficient regardless of what the infrastructure metrics say.

Reverts should use the same `/resize` subresource, not eviction. This
means recovery is also non-disruptive. When a workload reverts
repeatedly, exponential backoff prevents the controller from retrying
every cycle.

### Pattern 3: HPA coexistence

The VPA-HPA conflict is not inherent to vertical scaling. It is
inherent to changing requests without adjusting HPA's targets.

When a right-sizing controller lowers a pod's CPU request from 500m to
300m, the CPU utilization percentage (calculated as usage ÷ request)
jumps even though absolute usage has not changed. HPA sees 80%

> utilization instead of 48% and scales out.

Reviewer: As mentioned earlier, this behavior occurs only because both the HPA and VPA are configured to use the same **resource metric**. Configuring the HPA to scale based on metric X and the VPA to optimize based on metric Y will likely produce better results.

Author: Addressed in `29c31032f0`: HPA coexistence leads with metric separation / `controlledResources`. Proportional target adjustment is only an optional last resort when percentage-of-request HPA must stay on the same resource.

A confidence score combines time coverage and data density. Here,
`dataPoints` is the number of resource usage samples returned by the
metrics source (for example, individual data points from a Prometheus
range query) over the observation window:

```math
\begin{aligned}
\text{timeComponent} &= \text{days of data collected} \\
\text{dataComponent} &= \sqrt{\frac{\text{dataPoints}}{24}} \\
\text{confidence} &= \operatorname{clamp}\!\left(\frac{\min(\text{timeComponent},\;\text{dataComponent})}{7},\; 0,\; 1\right)
\end{aligned}
```

At low confidence, apply a buffer that adds headroom. At full
confidence, the buffer shrinks to zero:

\\(\text{confidenceFactor} = 1 + \text{multiplier} \times (1 - \text{confidence})^{\text{exponent}}\\)

With the defaults of multiplier=1.0 and exponent=2.0, a workload with
no data gets a 100% safety buffer that decays quadratically as
confidence grows, reaching zero at full confidence (one week of data).
This prevents aggressive right-sizing of newly deployed or recently
changed workloads.

### Pattern 5: Change filtering to prevent thrashing

Without dampening, a right-sizing controller can oscillate between

> values each cycle. I recommend two filters:

Reviewer 2: similar as my previous comment, I feel that coming from our blog, this reads more like "official k8s team recommends these two filters" rather than "some individual recommends these two filters". I don't know if that's what we want.

Author: Addressed in `29c31032f0`: dampening constants are framed as field examples ("one team might…" / "for example"), not as Kubernetes-recommended filters.

Burst detection adds another layer. If the maximum observed usage
exceeds 3× the 95th percentile, the workload exhibits bursty behavior.
A logarithmic boost based on burst magnitude adds proportional
headroom:

\\(\text{burstFactor} = 1 + \text{sensitivity} \times \log_2\!\left(\frac{\text{max}}{\text{p95}}\right)\\)

A 4× burst magnitude adds 20% headroom. An 8× burst adds 30%. The
logarithmic curve prevents extreme bursts from inflating recommendations
excessively.

## The path forward

In-place pod resize removes the last architectural barrier to
automated vertical scaling in Kubernetes. The patterns described
here, staged rollout, multi-signal safety, HPA coexistence,
confidence-based recommendations, and change filtering, represent
what the community has learned from years of VPA's limitations.

The ecosystem is still early. As more controllers adopt the Pod `resize`
subresource, we will collectively discover new patterns for safe
resource management. Whether you build your own controller or adopt
an existing one, the principles are the same: be conservative with
little data, use canary rollouts, monitor application-level SLOs,
and always have an automatic revert path.

> The waste problem is solvable. The API is there. These patterns build

Reviewer 3: some call to action may be to understand APIs shortcomings. What API cannot express today and what it can. Also limitations like we cannot change QoS of Pod or resize when swap is enabled.

But yes, the summary and call to action is reasonable

on lessons learned from VPA and early adopters of in-place resize, and
they have shown promise in early deployments. What remains is broader

> adoption.

Reviewer 4: Looking at this path forward, is this type of article really appropriate for the kubernetes blog?
It kinda just explains how in-place could be used better, but currently no kubernetes tools support these features.

What is a reader supposed to gain from this?

Reviewer 2: +1 

This to me reads as an opinion piece that belongs more on a platform like Medium or a personal technical blog. The opinions are definitely valid and helpful but I am not certain this is the right forum for it.

I feel like the IPPR GA announcement and documentation covered the major points from the perspective of kubernetes? (Disclaimer that I'm likely biased as the author / feature owner)

If we want to focus on 'right-sizing controller design' then we should reposition this imo.

Reviewer 5: We/Blog team see a couple of questions here regarding : Not using "I" or having personal opinion in blog 
(**we/blog team welcome personal opinions as it gives personal touch to it which makes @SebTardif , the author sound like a person rather than a representative.**)
Note:  Blogs are not docs so having personal opinion is fine unless it completely misleads readers!

Author: Addressed in `29c31032f0` with a full reposition: the post is now a practitioner composition guide (VPA-first path + field examples), not a custom-controller feature catalog. Reader gain is stated in the lede (hands-off right-sizing that prefers live resize).

Author: Addressed in `29c31032f0`. Goal is spelled out in the top-level PR comment and lede: hands-off right-sizing preferring live resize, composing existing capabilities; right-sizing scoped as one IPPR use case; not an official controller build guide.

Reviewer 2: > We/Blog team see a couple of questions here regarding : Not using "I" or having personal opinion in blog
(we/blog team welcome personal opinions as it gives personal touch to it which makes @SebTardif , the author sound like a person rather than a representative.)
Note: Blogs are not docs so having personal opinion is fine unless it completely misleads readers!

I haven't fully read the edits so maybe it's already there, in which case you can disregard this comment, but in that case there could be something at the top that explains these opinions are coming from @SebTardif's end-user experience building right-sizing controllers (without specifically mentioning Attune). I think that would help contextualize?

---
layout: blog
title: "Safe In-Place Pod Right-Sizing in Kubernetes 1.33+"
draft: true
slug: safe-in-place-pod-right-sizing
author: >
  [Sebastien Tardif](https://github.com/SebTardif)
---

> With in-place pod resize now GA in Kubernetes 1.35, the ecosystem has a

Reviewer 6: Let's say "since"; more idiomatic when there has been at least one release since.

```suggestion
With _in-place pod resize_ generally available (GA) since Kubernetes 1.35, the ecosystem has gained a
```

powerful new primitive for adjusting container resources without eviction.
But the API is just the mechanism. This post covers the patterns needed
to use it safely in production: graduated rollout, multi-signal auto-revert,
HPA coexistence, confidence-based recommendations, and change filtering.

<!--more-->

## The waste problem

> According to [CAST AI's 2025 Kubernetes cost report](https://cast.ai/blog/kubernetes-cost-report/), clusters in their

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
According to CAST AI's 2025 [Kubernetes cost report](https://cast.ai/blog/kubernetes-cost-report/), clusters in their
```

dataset averaged roughly 8% CPU utilization. While that number reflects
their customer base rather than every cluster in existence, the
directional signal is consistent across vendors: the vast majority of
provisioned compute sits idle. CAST AI found 99.94% of clusters
overprovisioned, with 83% of container costs going to idle resources.
Industry estimates put the resulting cloud infrastructure waste at
$44.5 billion annually.

The root cause is not laziness. It is rational fear. Setting a CPU
request to 2 cores when you only use 400 millicores is the rational
choice when the alternative is getting OOM-killed at 3 AM. Developers
over-provision because under-provisioning has immediate, painful
consequences, while over-provisioning only has a slow, invisible cost.

> Kubernetes has had the Vertical Pod Autoscaler (VPA) since 2018, yet

Reviewer 6: We write VerticalPodAutoscaler without spaces.

VPA in fully automated mode remains far less common than HPA in
production environments. Why?

## Why VPA adoption stalled

> VPA's approach to right-sizing has three fundamental problems that have

Reviewer 6: Maybe "had", not "has"; VPA does have support for in-place resizing, doesn't it?

kept it out of production for most teams:

**Problem 1: Eviction-based updates.** VPA changes pod resources by
evicting the pod and letting the controller recreate it with new values.
This means downtime, rescheduling, cold cache starts, and connection
interruptions. For stateful workloads, single-replica services, or
anything with a slow startup, this is unacceptable.

**Problem 2: HPA conflicts.** VPA and HPA fight over the same axis.
When VPA lowers CPU requests, utilization percentage jumps, triggering
HPA to scale out. More replicas lower utilization again, so VPA lowers
requests further. This feedback loop destabilizes workloads. The
official Kubernetes documentation

> [warns against using VPA with HPA on CPU or memory metrics](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/#support-for-resource-metrics).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
cautions readers about [using VPA with HPA on CPU or memory metrics](/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/#support-for-resource-metrics).
```

**Problem 3: Opaque recommendations.** VPA relies on a histogram-based
historical usage model whose decision process can be difficult for
operators to inspect or explain. While several parameters are
configurable, understanding why VPA chose a specific value for a
specific workload requires digging into internal state that most
teams never see. When a recommendation is surprising, there is no
straightforward way to audit the reasoning.

> These are not implementation bugs. They are architectural constraints

Reviewer 6: VPA supports in place resize, so this seems tricky to endorse.

that stem from VPA being designed before in-place resize existed.

> ## In-place pod resize changes everything

Reviewer 6: Changed (past tense), surely?

  after resize, something went wrong.
- **Pod readiness**: If the pod transitions to NotReady after resize,
  revert.
- **Application SLOs**: Custom PromQL queries against application-level
  metrics (latency percentiles, error rates) provide the strongest
  signal. If p99 latency exceeds an SLO after resize, the resources
  are insufficient regardless of what the infrastructure metrics say.

Reverts should use the same `/resize` subresource, not eviction. This
means recovery is also non-disruptive. When a workload reverts
repeatedly, exponential backoff prevents the operator from retrying
every cycle.

### Pattern 3: HPA coexistence

The VPA-HPA conflict is not inherent to vertical scaling. It is
inherent to changing requests without adjusting HPA's targets.

When a right-sizing operator lowers a pod's CPU request from 500m to
300m, the CPU utilization percentage (calculated as usage/request)
jumps even though absolute usage has not changed. HPA sees 80%
utilization instead of 48% and scales out.

One strategy for preserving equivalent absolute CPU thresholds is to
recalculate HPA's utilization target proportionally after a resize:

```

> newTarget = originalTarget * (oldRequest / newRequest)

Reviewer 6: If doing math, we recommend using the support for inline equations. See https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#formulae-and-equations

This approach has caveats. The adjusted target may exceed 100% and
require capping. HPA stabilization windows add complexity. Custom
metrics HPAs do not fit this model. And progressive resizes can
introduce drift if the original target is not stored before the first
adjustment. Despite these limitations, the pattern provides a
practical starting point for percentage-based CPU utilization HPAs,
which remain the most common configuration.

### Pattern 4: Confidence-based recommendations

A right-sizing recommendation based on 2 hours of data should be
more conservative than one based on 7 days. The recommendation
pipeline should include a confidence dimension.

A confidence score combines time coverage and data density. Here,
`dataPoints` is the number of resource usage samples returned by the
metrics source (for example, individual data points from a Prometheus
range query) over the observation window:

```
timeComponent = days of data collected
dataComponent = sqrt(dataPoints / 24)
confidence = clamp(min(timeComponent, dataComponent) / 7, 0, 1)
```

At low confidence, apply a buffer that adds headroom. At full
confidence, the buffer shrinks to zero:

```

> confidenceFactor = 1 + multiplier * (1 - confidence)^exponent

Reviewer 6: See https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#formulae-and-equations - there is equation support available.

values each cycle. Two filters are essential:

- **Minimum change threshold**: Suppress changes below a percentage
  (e.g., 10%) of the current value. If the recommendation is 460m
  and the current request is 500m, the 8% difference is noise.
- **Maximum change cap**: Limit each resize to a percentage of the
  current value (e.g., 50% for CPU). This forces gradual convergence
  over multiple cycles instead of a single large jump.

Directional caps add further control. You might allow 50% increases
(to recover from under-provisioning quickly) but only 30% decreases
(to avoid sudden resource drops).

## Time-of-day awareness and burst detection

Workload patterns vary throughout the day. A batch processing service
might use 2 cores during nightly ETL jobs and 200 millicores during
the day. A simple percentile over the full dataset would either
over-provision for daytime or under-provision for the batch window.

Bucketing metrics into 24 hourly windows and taking the maximum
percentile across all hours ensures the recommendation covers the
peak hour without over-provisioning for the rest of the day.

Burst detection adds another layer. If the maximum observed usage

> exceeds 3x the 95th percentile, the workload exhibits bursty behavior.

Reviewer 6: (nit)
```suggestion
exceeds 3× the 95th percentile, the workload exhibits bursty behavior.
```

A logarithmic boost based on burst magnitude adds proportional
headroom:

```

> burstFactor = 1 + sensitivity * log2(max / p95)

Reviewer 6: See https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#formulae-and-equations - there is equation support available.

```

A 4x burst magnitude adds 20% headroom. An 8x burst adds 30%. The
logarithmic curve prevents extreme bursts from inflating recommendations
excessively.

## The path forward

> In-place pod resize removes the last architectural barrier to

Reviewer 6: "Removed"; it is no longer new.

Reviewer 6: You didn't yet respond to this @sebtardif - please do.

Author: Addressed in the full rewrite (`29c31032f0`): that path-forward wording is gone; the post no longer frames the feature as newly removing a barrier.

automated vertical scaling in Kubernetes. The patterns described
here, graduated rollout, multi-signal safety, HPA coexistence,
confidence-based recommendations, and change filtering, represent
what the community has learned from years of VPA's limitations.

> The ecosystem is still early. As more operators adopt the `/resize`

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The ecosystem is still early. As more controllers adopt and use the `resize` Pod
```

Leading `/` may confuse some readers.

and connection drops. VPA's `InPlaceOrRecreate` update mode now addresses
this by leveraging in-place resize when possible.

**Problem 2: HPA conflicts.** VPA and HPA fight over the same axis.
When VPA lowers CPU requests, utilization percentage jumps, triggering
HPA to scale out. More replicas lower utilization again, so VPA lowers
requests further. This feedback loop destabilizes workloads. The
official Kubernetes documentation
[cautions readers about using VPA with HPA on CPU or memory metrics](/docs/concepts/workloads/autoscaling/horizontal-pod-autoscale/#support-for-resource-metrics).

**Problem 3: Opaque recommendations.** VPA relies on a histogram-based
historical usage model whose decision process can be difficult for
operators to inspect or explain. While several parameters are
configurable, understanding why VPA chose a specific value for a
specific workload requires digging into internal state that most
teams never see. When a recommendation is surprising, there is no
straightforward way to audit the reasoning.

VPA's adoption of in-place resize solved the first problem. The
remaining challenges, HPA conflicts and recommendation transparency,

> are open problems for any controller that automates resource changes.

Reviewer 6: I'm not sure about this. Part of the barrier is that there's no published, easily discoverable container image for the add-on. Another similar challenge is the Helm chart; not everyone uses Helm, but if you do, the chart is 0.10 and depends on ingress-nginx (which the Kubernetes project strongly recommends not to use due to lack of security maintenance).

VPA is a nice idea, it's just not been staffed as well as some parts of Kubernetes. The people who have got it this far have done a good job IMO.

Reviewer 6: Would you be willing to reframe this part? Even if your opinion is that the lack of in-place resizing was the biggest adoption barrier (which is fine if true) I'd like to acknowledge that there have been others.

## In-place pod resize changed everything

Kubernetes 1.27 introduced in-place pod resize as an alpha feature.
In 1.33, it graduated to beta and became enabled by default. In 1.35,
it reached GA. This is one of the most significant changes to

> Kubernetes resource management since the platform was created.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Kubernetes 1.27 introduced in-place pod resize as an alpha feature.
In 1.33, it graduated to beta and became enabled by default. In 1.35,
it reached GA. In my view, this is one of the most significant changes to
Kubernetes resource management since the platform was created.
```

As a project, I'm pretty sure we think [DRA](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/) is a more significant change.

the new values directly, and the container continues running without
interruption.

```yaml
# Container resize policy in the pod spec
containers:
  - name: app
    resources:
      requests:
        cpu: "500m"
        memory: "256Mi"
    resizePolicy:
      - resourceName: cpu
        restartPolicy: NotRequired
      - resourceName: memory
        restartPolicy: NotRequired
```

CPU changes with `restartPolicy: NotRequired` are typically applied
in-place by adjusting cgroup limits. Memory changes are more nuanced:
while in-place memory resize is supported, the Kubernetes documentation
notes that `RestartContainer` is often appropriate for memory depending
on runtime constraints. Operators should choose the resize policy per
resource based on their workload's characteristics.

Either way, this is a fundamental shift. Continuous, fine-grained
resource adjustment is now practical in production without pod eviction.

But the API is just the mechanism. The hard problems are: how do you
decide what the right values are, how do you roll out changes safely,
and how do you coexist with HPA?

## Patterns for safe in-place right-sizing

> Building a safe right-sizing operator on top of the `/resize` subresource

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Building a safe right-sizing controller on top of the `/resize` subresource
```

Oh, one more thing. The _operator_ concept is nebulous, but VPA, HPA, and their ilk are _controllers_.

requires solving several problems that the raw API does not address.
These patterns apply to any operator leveraging in-place resize.

### Pattern 1: Graduated rollout

The first rule of production resource changes is: do not change
everything at once. A graduated rollout model lets teams build
confidence incrementally.

> A practical graduation model has five stages:

Reviewer 6: How about this?
```suggestion
### Pattern 1: Staged rollout

The first rule of production resource management is: do not change
everything at once. A progressive rollout model lets teams build
confidence incrementally.

A practical model uses these five stages:
```

The word "graduated" typically means "has reached general availability", so I recommend _progressive_ or _staged_. In the suggestion I actually use both, and I think that's fine.

1. **Observe**: Collect metrics silently. No recommendations, no
   changes. This validates that the metrics pipeline is working.
2. **Recommend**: Compute and surface recommendations, but do not
   apply them. Teams review what would change.
3. **One-shot**: Apply the recommendation to one pod per cycle and
   stop. Validates the resize mechanism on a single instance.
4. **Canary**: Resize a percentage of pods (e.g., 10%), observe for
   a configurable window, and only promote to the full fleet if safety
   checks pass.
5. **Auto**: Continuously resize all eligible pods each reconciliation
   cycle.

This mirrors how organizations adopt any infrastructure change:
read-only first, then single instance, then canary, then full rollout.
Each stage can run for days or weeks before progressing.

### Pattern 2: Multi-signal safety with auto-revert

In-place resize is non-disruptive going forward, but a bad resize can

> still cause problems. A right-sizing operator needs to detect failures

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
still cause problems. A right-sizing controller needs to detect failures
```

See https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/55963/files#r3449099595

Even if you use a library such as Operator Framework, this thing is a controller.

  revert immediately. Check `lastState.terminated.reason == "OOMKilled"`
  with a timestamp after the resize.
- **CPU throttling**: Query `rate(container_cpu_cfs_throttled_periods_total[5m])
  / rate(container_cpu_cfs_periods_total[5m])`. If throttling exceeds a
  threshold (e.g., 50%), the workload may be CPU-constrained and warrants
  investigation of limits, requests, and observed demand. Note that
  throttling is driven by CPU limits, not requests directly, so this
  signal must be interpreted in context. Add a grace period after resize
  because rate windows include pre-resize data.
- **Restart spikes**: If `restartCount` jumps by more than a threshold
  after resize, something went wrong.
- **Pod readiness**: If the pod transitions to NotReady after resize,
  revert.
- **Application SLOs**: Custom PromQL queries against application-level
  metrics (latency percentiles, error rates) provide the strongest
  signal. If p99 latency exceeds an SLO after resize, the resources
  are insufficient regardless of what the infrastructure metrics say.

Reverts should use the same `/resize` subresource, not eviction. This
means recovery is also non-disruptive. When a workload reverts

> repeatedly, exponential backoff prevents the operator from retrying

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
repeatedly, exponential backoff prevents the controller from retrying
```

every cycle.

### Pattern 3: HPA coexistence

The VPA-HPA conflict is not inherent to vertical scaling. It is
inherent to changing requests without adjusting HPA's targets.

> When a right-sizing operator lowers a pod's CPU request from 500m to

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
When a right-sizing controller lowers a pod's CPU request from 500m to
```

> 300m, the CPU utilization percentage (calculated as usage/request)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
300m, the CPU utilization percentage (calculated as _usage_ ÷ _request_)
```

jumps even though absolute usage has not changed. HPA sees 80%
utilization instead of 48% and scales out.

One strategy for preserving equivalent absolute CPU thresholds is to
recalculate HPA's utilization target proportionally after a resize:

```math
\text{newTarget} = \text{originalTarget} \times \frac{\text{oldRequest}}{\text{newRequest}}

> ```

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
\\(\text{newTarget} = \text{originalTarget} \times \frac{\text{oldRequest}}{\text{newRequest}}\\)
```

If the original HPA target was 70% and requests dropped from 500m to

> 300m, the new target becomes `70% * (500/300) ≈ 117%`. This preserves

Reviewer 6: (nit, recommended to fix)
In a blog, we can use real math symbols, eg

```suggestion
300m, the new target becomes **70% × (500 ÷ 300)` ≈ 117%**. This preserves
```

adjustment. Despite these limitations, the pattern provides a
practical starting point for percentage-based CPU utilization HPAs,
which remain the most common configuration.

### Pattern 4: Confidence-based recommendations

A right-sizing recommendation based on 2 hours of data should be
more conservative than one based on 7 days. The recommendation
pipeline should include a confidence dimension.

A confidence score combines time coverage and data density. Here,
`dataPoints` is the number of resource usage samples returned by the
metrics source (for example, individual data points from a Prometheus
range query) over the observation window:

```math
\begin{aligned}
\text{timeComponent} &= \text{days of data collected} \\
\text{dataComponent} &= \sqrt{\frac{\text{dataPoints}}{24}} \\
\text{confidence} &= \operatorname{clamp}\!\left(\frac{\min(\text{timeComponent},\;\text{dataComponent})}{7},\; 0,\; 1\right)
\end{aligned}
```

At low confidence, apply a buffer that adds headroom. At full
confidence, the buffer shrinks to zero:

```math
\text{confidenceFactor} = 1 + \text{multiplier} \times (1 - \text{confidence})^{\text{exponent}}

> ```

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
\\(\text{confidenceFactor} = 1 + \text{multiplier} \times (1 - \text{confidence})^{\text{exponent}}\\)
```

With the defaults of multiplier=1.0 and exponent=2.0, a workload with
no data gets a 100% safety buffer that decays quadratically as
confidence grows, reaching zero at full confidence (one week of data).
This prevents aggressive right-sizing of newly deployed or recently
changed workloads.

### Pattern 5: Change filtering to prevent thrashing

> Without dampening, a right-sizing operator can oscillate between

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Without dampening, a right-sizing controller can oscillate between
```

> values each cycle. Two filters are essential:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
values each cycle. I recommend two filters:
```

Reviewer 6: It's a good opinion, but these filters are not the only viable solution.

- **Maximum change cap**: Limit each resize to a percentage of the
  current value (e.g., 50% for CPU). This forces gradual convergence
  over multiple cycles instead of a single large jump.

Directional caps add further control. You might allow 50% increases
(to recover from under-provisioning quickly) but only 30% decreases
(to avoid sudden resource drops).

## Time-of-day awareness and burst detection

Workload patterns vary throughout the day. A batch processing service
might use 2 cores during nightly ETL jobs and 200 millicores during
the day. A simple percentile over the full dataset would either
over-provision for daytime or under-provision for the batch window.

Bucketing metrics into 24 hourly windows and taking the maximum
percentile across all hours ensures the recommendation covers the
peak hour without over-provisioning for the rest of the day.

Burst detection adds another layer. If the maximum observed usage
exceeds 3× the 95th percentile, the workload exhibits bursty behavior.
A logarithmic boost based on burst magnitude adds proportional
headroom:

```math
\text{burstFactor} = 1 + \text{sensitivity} \times \log_2\!\left(\frac{\text{max}}{\text{p95}}\right)

> ```

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
\\(\text{burstFactor} = 1 + \text{sensitivity} \times \log_2\!\left(\frac{\text{max}}{\text{p95}}\right)\\)
```

---
layout: blog
title: "Safe In-Place Pod Right-Sizing in Kubernetes 1.33+"
draft: true
slug: safe-in-place-pod-right-sizing
author: >
  [Sebastien Tardif](https://github.com/SebTardif)
---

With in-place pod resize now GA in Kubernetes 1.35, the ecosystem has a
powerful new primitive for adjusting container resources without eviction.
But the API is just the mechanism. This post covers the patterns needed
to use it safely in production: graduated rollout, multi-signal auto-revert,
HPA coexistence, confidence-based recommendations, and change filtering.

<!--more-->

## The waste problem

> According to CAST AI's 2025 Kubernetes cost report, clusters in their

Reviewer 5: Could you please add a link to the CAST AI 2025 Kubernetes Cost Report referenced here? It would help readers understand the source of these statistics.

Author: Added a hyperlink to the report. Thanks for catching the missing reference.

request to 2 cores when you only use 400 millicores is the rational
choice when the alternative is getting OOM-killed at 3 AM. Developers
over-provision because under-provisioning has immediate, painful
consequences, while over-provisioning only has a slow, invisible cost.

Kubernetes has had the Vertical Pod Autoscaler (VPA) since 2018, yet
VPA in fully automated mode remains far less common than HPA in
production environments. Why?

## Why VPA adoption stalled

VPA's approach to right-sizing has three fundamental problems that have
kept it out of production for most teams:

**Problem 1: Eviction-based updates.** VPA changes pod resources by
evicting the pod and letting the controller recreate it with new values.
This means downtime, rescheduling, cold cache starts, and connection
interruptions. For stateful workloads, single-replica services, or
anything with a slow startup, this is unacceptable.

**Problem 2: HPA conflicts.** VPA and HPA fight over the same axis.
When VPA lowers CPU requests, utilization percentage jumps, triggering
HPA to scale out. More replicas lower utilization again, so VPA lowers
requests further. This feedback loop destabilizes workloads. The

> official Kubernetes documentation warns against using VPA with HPA on

Reviewer 5: Could you please add a link to the Kubernetes documentation referenced here? Since this section cites guidance from the official documentation,

Author: Added a link to the [HPA resource metrics documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/#support-for-resource-metrics).

2. **Recommend**: Compute and surface recommendations, but do not
   apply them. Teams review what would change.
3. **One-shot**: Apply the recommendation to one pod per cycle and
   stop. Validates the resize mechanism on a single instance.
4. **Canary**: Resize a percentage of pods (e.g., 10%), observe for
   a configurable window, and only promote to the full fleet if safety
   checks pass.
5. **Auto**: Continuously resize all eligible pods each reconciliation
   cycle.

This mirrors how organizations adopt any infrastructure change:
read-only first, then single instance, then canary, then full rollout.
Each stage can run for days or weeks before progressing.

### Pattern 2: Multi-signal safety with auto-revert

In-place resize is non-disruptive going forward, but a bad resize can
still cause problems. A right-sizing operator needs to detect failures
and revert automatically, also in-place.

The critical signals to monitor after a resize:

- **OOM kills**: If the container is OOM-killed after a memory decrease,
  revert immediately. Check `lastState.terminated.reason == "OOMKilled"`
  with a timestamp after the resize.

> - **CPU throttling**: Query `rate(container_cpu_throttled_periods_total[5m])

Reviewer 5: I believe the metric name here should be container_cpu_cfs_throttled_periods_total rather than container_cpu_throttled_periods_total.
Reference (Standard cAdvisor metrics): https://github.com/google/cadvisor/blob/master/docs/storage/prometheus.md

Author: Good catch. Fixed to `container_cpu_cfs_throttled_periods_total` to match the canonical cAdvisor metric name.

recalculate HPA's utilization target proportionally after a resize:

```
newTarget = originalTarget * (oldRequest / newRequest)
```

If the original HPA target was 70% and requests dropped from 500m to
300m, the new target becomes `70% * (500/300) = 116%`, capped at 100%.
This preserves the same absolute CPU threshold (350m of actual usage)
while letting HPA continue to function correctly.

This approach has caveats. The adjusted target may exceed 100% and
require capping. HPA stabilization windows add complexity. Custom
metrics HPAs do not fit this model. And progressive resizes can
introduce drift if the original target is not stored before the first
adjustment. Despite these limitations, the pattern provides a
practical starting point for percentage-based CPU utilization HPAs,
which remain the most common configuration.

### Pattern 4: Confidence-based recommendations

A right-sizing recommendation based on 2 hours of data should be
more conservative than one based on 7 days. The recommendation
pipeline should include a confidence dimension.

A confidence score combines time coverage and data density:

```
timeComponent = days of data collected

> dataComponent = sqrt(dataPoints / 24)

Reviewer 5: Could you briefly define `dataPoints` variable in this section ?

Author: Added a definition. `dataPoints` is the number of resource usage samples returned by the metrics source (e.g., individual data points from a Prometheus range query) over the observation window. The division by 24 normalizes for sample density per hour.

over-provision for daytime or under-provision for the batch window.

Bucketing metrics into 24 hourly windows and taking the maximum
percentile across all hours ensures the recommendation covers the
peak hour without over-provisioning for the rest of the day.

Burst detection adds another layer. If the maximum observed usage
exceeds 3x the 95th percentile, the workload exhibits bursty behavior.
A logarithmic boost based on burst magnitude adds proportional
headroom:

```
burstFactor = 1 + sensitivity * log2(max / p95)
```

A 4x burst magnitude adds 20% headroom. An 8x burst adds 30%. The
logarithmic curve prevents extreme bursts from inflating recommendations
excessively.

## Implementation: Attune

[Attune](https://github.com/attune-io/attune) is an open-source
Kubernetes operator (Apache 2.0) that implements all of the patterns
described above. It requires Kubernetes 1.32+ and queries Prometheus
(including Thanos, VictoriaMetrics, and Grafana Mimir), Datadog,
or Amazon CloudWatch Container Insights for usage data.

Attune uses two CRDs: `AttunePolicy` for per-workload configuration
and `AttuneDefaults` for cluster-wide defaults. A minimal policy
in recommend mode:

> 

Reviewer 5: Implementation: Attune : Could you please remove this section which is against the Kubernetes blog guidelines on vendor pitches and external project promotion? Reference: https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/blog/guidelines/#what-we-do-not-publish

Author: Understood. Replaced the full section with a single-sentence mention of Attune as an open-source implementation of the patterns described, with no CRD examples, CLI output, or feature details.

```yaml
apiVersion: attune.io/v1alpha1
kind: AttunePolicy
metadata:
  name: api-server
spec:
  targetRef:
    kind: Deployment
    name: api-server
  metricsSource:
    prometheus:
      address: http://prometheus.monitoring:9090
  updateStrategy:
    type: Recommend
```

The `kubectl attune` plugin provides an `explain` command that shows
the full recommendation pipeline with intermediate values at each
stage, making the recommendation process fully transparent:

```

> $ kubectl attune explain -n production api-server

Reviewer 5: Please omit the shell prompt ($) from command
Kubernetes style guide: [Code snippet formatting](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#code-snippet-formatting)

Author: Fixed. Removed the `$` prefix per the style guide.

---
layout: blog
title: "Hands-off right-sizing without killing Pods"
draft: true
math: true
slug: safe-in-place-pod-right-sizing
author: >
  [Sebastien Tardif](https://github.com/SebTardif)
---

The goal many platform teams actually want is simple to say and hard to
run:

**Keep container CPU and memory requests aligned with real usage, continuously,
without treating Pod deletion, eviction, or container restart as the normal
way to apply every change.**

In-place Pod resize ([generally available since Kubernetes 1.35](/blog/2025/12/19/kubernetes-v1-35-in-place-pod-resize-ga/))
is the primitive that makes that goal realistic. It is not the whole system.

This post is about how those pieces work together so a resize API

> becomes **hands-off adaptive right-sizing**:

Reviewer 6: Style nit:
```suggestion
becomes *hands-off adaptive right-sizing*:
```

> 1. Measure usage over enough history.
> 2. Decide a new request (and maybe limit).
> 3. Apply with the Pod **resize** path when possible.
> 4. Verify the workload is still healthy.
> 5. Revert or dampen when it is not.
> 6. Coexist with horizontal scaling so the loops do not fight.

Reviewer 6: (nit / please check technical accuracy)
```suggestion
1. Measure usage over enough history.
1. Decide a new request (and maybe limit).
1. Apply with the Pod `resize` subresource when possible.
1. Verify the workload is still healthy.
1. Revert or dampen when it is not.
1. Coexist with horizontal scaling, so that controllers and their loops do not fight.
```

> I am writing as an operator and practitioner, not as a statement of official
> Kubernetes architecture. The Vertical Pod Autoscaler (VPA) is the main
> project-side answer for vertical recommendations and apply. Custom

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Kubernetes architecture. The VerticalPodAutoscaler (VPA) is the Kubernetes 
project's own implementation of automatic vertical scaling. Custom
```

> automation is optional. Where I give **concrete numbers, formulas, or
> stage names**, treat them as **field examples** one team might use, not as
> Kubernetes-endorsed standards. Other designs work. The **loop** is what
> matters.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
automation is optional. Where I give concrete numbers, formulas, or
stage names, treat them as examples from the field that one team might use, not as
Kubernetes-endorsed standards. Other designs work. The *loop* is what
matters.
```

restarts, OOM kills, pages at night. Over-requesting fails in private:
worse bin-packing and a larger bill. That is often **rational fear**, not
laziness. When the alternative to a 2-core request was "get OOM-killed or
throttled at 3 AM," over-provisioning was the safe local choice.

Public telemetry keeps showing large headroom. Datadog has reported that
**over 65% of Kubernetes workloads use less than half of their requested
CPU and memory**
([container report](https://www.datadoghq.com/container-report/)).
Industry FinOps discussions likewise call out overprovisioning as a major
cost driver. Treat any single report as directional for that dataset, not
a census of every cluster.

Static requests cannot track a service that grows, ships a heavier
dependency, or has a nightly batch spike. People want **adaptation**.
Until in-place resize, adaptation usually meant **replace the Pod**.

## The end state: a closed loop that prefers live resize

Hands-off right-sizing is a control loop, not a one-shot patch:

```text
observe usage  →  recommend  →  apply (prefer /resize)  →  verify  →
    ↑________________ revert / backoff / dampen ______________|

> ```

Reviewer 6: Use a diagram, **not** text. We don't use ASCII art like this.

See https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/diagram-guide/

**Success looks like:** requests drift toward real need; most applies do
not evict or restart; bad decreases undo cleanly; HPA still scales for
load, not for request-math artifacts; thin data stays cautious.

**Failure looks like:** every change restarts Pods; requests flap every
reconcile; VPA and HPA chase the same CPU percentage; memory is cut under
a spike; nobody trusts the numbers, so automation is turned off.

In-place resize addresses the **mechanism** of the first failure. The rest
is how measure, decide, apply, verify, and coexist fit together.

---

## 1. Apply with in-place resize when you can

Docs: [Resize container resources](/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/resize-container-resources/).

> The Pod **resize** subresource updates desired CPU and memory in

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The Pod `resize` subresource updates desired CPU and memory in
```

[Manage resources for containers](/docs/concepts/configuration/manage-resources-containers/)
for how requests and limits work). The `kubelet` actuates into
`status.containerStatuses[*].resources`. Container `resizePolicy` chooses
`NotRequired` (live cgroup update) versus `RestartContainer` per resource.

Example (prefer live CPU; restart on memory when the app cannot adapt):

```yaml
containers:
  - name: app
    resources:
      requests:
        cpu: "500m"
        memory: "256Mi"
      limits:
        cpu: "500m"
        memory: "256Mi"
    resizePolicy:
      - resourceName: cpu
        restartPolicy: NotRequired
      - resourceName: memory
        restartPolicy: RestartContainer
```

For a hands-off loop that avoids kill and restart when possible:

- Prefer **`NotRequired` for CPU** when the runtime tolerates live change.
- Treat **memory** carefully. CPU and memory resizes both go through
  cgroup updates when `NotRequired` is used. Many apps and runtimes (for
  example some Java setups) still cannot adapt to a live memory limit,
  which is why docs often show `RestartContainer` for memory. A loop that
  "never restarts" may still need restart for **some** memory changes.

> - Preserve **QoS class** ([Pod QoS](/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/pod-qos/)).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Preserve [QoS class](/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/pod-qos/).
```

> - Know the **hard limits** on the task page: CPU and memory only; Windows,
>   swap, and static CPU or Memory manager policies; non-restartable init
>   and ephemeral containers; and related restrictions.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Know the *hard constraints* of vertical scaling: CPU and memory only; Windows,
  swap, and static CPU or Memory manager policies; non-restartable init
  and ephemeral containers; and related restrictions.
```

### Memory decrease is part of adaptation, with a real race

Since 1.35, decreasing memory limits is allowed. The `kubelet` does a
**best-effort** check: if usage is already above the new limit, it skips
applying and leaves the resize in progress rather than forcing an immediate
OOM. That check can still lose a race if usage spikes right after the
check. See the GA blog and

> [kubernetes/kubernetes#135670](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/135670).

Reviewer 6: Try to rewrite this. Follow the style guide and don't assume that readers know what you mean by "the GA blog".

Platform guard is not application health. OOM and readiness after a
decrease remain first-class signals to revert.

---

## 2. Decide and apply, start with VPA

[HPA](/docs/concepts/workloads/autoscaling/horizontal-pod-autoscale/)
is core. [VPA](/docs/concepts/workloads/autoscaling/vertical-pod-autoscale/)

> is an **add-on** you install. That alone explains much of the adoption

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
is an *add-on* you can install. That alone explains much of the adoption
```

gap versus HPA: one is always available, one is an operational choice.

VPA has also moved with in-place resize. It is not stuck forever on
"evict every change":

| Mode | Role in a hands-off path |
|------|---------------------------|
| `Off` | Measure and recommend only. Best first step. |
| `Initial` | Set resources at Pod creation only. |
| `Recreate` | Apply by eviction and recreate. Disruptive but PDB-aware. |
| `InPlaceOrRecreate` | Prefer in-place resize; fall back to eviction when needed. |
| `InPlace` | In-place only where available and gated; retry without eviction fallback. |

Eviction-based apply uses the Eviction API and respects
[PodDisruptionBudgets](/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/disruptions/).
For hands-off without kill as **normal**, prefer modes that try in-place
first, and keep PDBs for fallback.

Use `resourcePolicy.containerPolicies` so automation stays bounded:
`minAllowed` / `maxAllowed`, `controlledResources`, and
`controlledValues` (`RequestsOnly` versus `RequestsAndLimits`).

> ### What operators still own after VPA is configured

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
### What cluster operators still own after VPA is configured
```

Even with good VPA modes, teams still hit loop problems VPA does not fully
absorb for every organization:

1. **Disruption risk on the fallback path** when in-place cannot apply.
2. **HPA interaction** when both use the same resource utilization signal.
3. **Trust and explainability.** Histogram-style recommendations can be
   hard to audit when a value looks surprising. That is not unique to VPA,
   but it is why many teams stay on `Off` longer than they planned: they
   can see a number, not always why it is that number.

Those are reasons to **configure carefully and verify after apply**, not
reasons to ignore VPA. Most teams should exhaust VPA `Off` → bounded
policies → in-place-capable modes before writing a recommender.

You do **not** need a custom controller for a basic closed loop. Custom
automation is for policies the add-on cannot express.

---

## 3. Coexist with horizontal scaling

> When something lowers CPU **requests**, utilization as
> usage ÷ request jumps even if absolute usage is flat. HPA **can** scale
> out; more replicas drop usage per Pod; vertical logic trims again. That
> feedback shows up when both loops use the **same resource utilization
> metric**. It is not destiny.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
When something lowers CPU *requests*, utilization as
usage ÷ request jumps even if absolute usage is flat. HPA **can** scale
out; more replicas drop usage per Pod; vertical logic trims again. That
feedback shows up when both loops use the **same resource utilization
metric**. It is not destiny.
```

not a standard.

Alternatively, keep vertical for baseline and let **HPA** (or scheduled
overlays) absorb spikes. That composition is valid too.

---

## Putting it together (minimal path first)

Stay close to project components until they fail you:

1. Confirm in-place resize on a canary Pod
   ([resize task](/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/resize-container-resources/)).
2. Install VPA; targets in **`Off`**; read recommendations across real
   traffic (Recommend stage).
3. Set `containerPolicies` bounds; choose requests-only versus
   requests-and-limits.
4. Point HPA at a **non-competing** metric if you scale horizontally.
5. Move toward **`InPlaceOrRecreate` or `InPlace`** only after numbers and
   PDBs look sane; widen blast radius using something like the ladder
   above.
6. Wire multi-signal verify (and revert) before you call it hands-off.
7. Only then add custom policy (confidence-style headroom, diurnal
   buckets, stricter dampening) if VPA defaults are not enough.

If you replace the recommender or actuator later, **keep the same jobs**:
prefer resize, verify, revert with backoff, coexist with HPA, dampen,

> respect history and load shape.

Reviewer 6: What do you mean by "jobs" here?
